and that thin theological view that some
Christians have of what it is to have faith
is profoundly wrong it is unbiblical and and
that's where we have drifted to this idea that
people say I can be against something in my mind
but I don't have to do anything about it [Music]
hello everyone watching and listening today
I'm speaking with author speaker radio host an
incorrigible Eric mataxis we discuss his most
recent book a letter to the American Church
which argues that it's a betrayal of Faith to stay
silent in the face of tyranny we parallel the rise
of the wannabe Arbiters of speech across history
against those making themselves manifest today
and detail the responsibility to act against
falsehood that's an intrinsic part of the
abrahamic tradition although increasingly
non-existent in the American church today
so you recently wrote letter to the American
church I released a podcast a while back or
I guess it was just a monologue which was
message to Christians and uh so obviously
to some degree we're thinking along parallel
lines Why did you think it was necessary to write
a letter to the American Church what did you
mean by the American church and uh tell us about
the letter and what the consequences of writing
that was that was 2022 that was released right
yes um I uh I'm I'm large uh I contain multitudes
you know who said that I believe it was Chris
Christie just kidding uh I I'm very eclectic
I'm very eclectic and I have to tell you that
um some people know me principally as a writer
because I've written whatever 14 plus books
many children's books uh I do of course um radio
show TV show and so on and so forth but almost
everything that I do I do for everyone in other
words I'm trying to reach uh a broad audience
not just I want to sell more books but because I I
feel God created me to speak to a popular audience
to to a wide audience this most recent book which
is my shortest book letter to the American Church
um is the first time I have ever written
something specifically only for those who claim
to be Christians I thought to myself well I
shouldn't say I thought to myself I've I had a
I had a number of thoughts rambling around in my
head that became increasingly highlighted uh in
a way that I couldn't uh I don't know how some
people will take this but but I've never felt
God called me to write something the way he did
this book in retrospect all of my books Bonhoeffer
and so on and so forth it's it's it's exceedingly
clear to me that God's hand was in my writing them
but never have I felt a burning passion that I
knew was God calling me to write this specific
book so it's a strange and unique thing in my
experience there's a uh you know if you think
of of the title letter to the American Church it
would be natural to think what kind of hubris are
we talking about here that somebody would dare uh
to write letter to the American church as though
he's a modern day Paul or something like that but
on the contrary because I felt it was God wanting
to say this uh I had more humility than ever
in writing it thinking that I cannot get this
wrong I have to really be sure to take myself
out of the way as much as as possible to to
let God say what he wants to to say and I don't
mean this in any mystical sense but I was very
um soberminded to write something with a title
letter to the American church and the reason I
wrote it in a nutshell is that um in 2010 I
came out with my my longest book a biography
of Dietrich Bonhoeffer the German Pastor who
was involved in the plot to kill Hitler um I
knew when I was writing that book uh that it it
sort of I could I could smell what was happening
as I was writing that book I could smell that in
our future in the west not just in America but in
America specifically and in with the events of the
last few years uh let's say the last three years
um it was impossible for me to avoid the thought
that just as the Silence of the church in Germany
opened the door to Hell on Earth which we now
know because we know what happened and of course
I documented in my Bonhoeffer book and in this
new booklet to the American church but I but but
the thesis of this book letter to the American
church is that precisely as the German church
was silent and precisely as that opened the door
to hell to every kind of evil it is the silence
of the church in America now this minute that is
similarly opening the door to hellish uh things
on a number of fronts the the parallels are so
marked even the parallel of the excuses given
by uh theologians and Christians in the 30s who
said we don't want to speak out against Hitler we
don't want to these are our reasons dramatically
similar parallels among many uh evangelicals and
others in the American church today for why they
are being silent on issues that they ought to be
screaming about issues that you and others have
shouted about the evil of the transgender uh
lunacy and on and on and on and on so I I said to
myself I can't believe it but the parallels are
are so dramatic uh to The Silence of the church
in Germany that I am just burning to to speak this
hoping and praying that God in his grace would use
it to wake up those who might be awakened we know
that some people will insist on sleep walking to
the abyss that they're they they cannot be reached
but I know that in Germany in the 30s there were
many good pastors who got this wrong many good
pastors who were fooled um deceived uh who allowed
themselves to be deceived until it was too late
many of them woke up and then it was too late to
do anything so I wrote this book hoping to reach
those specifically who call themselves Christians
who dare to call themselves Christians uh with
the idea that they would say yes I have been
complicit in my silence in my inaction uh these
excuses are not biblically based I must speak
out okay so let me ask you there's a lot there so
let me go through some of the questions that
we might address I'd like to know what you mean
by God's hand say rather than your hand in your
writing and so that people can understand exactly
what you mean by that and how that appears to you
and how you distinguish your voice let's say from
from the spirit of inspiration then I'd like
to know what events of the last three years
that you you think are particularly problematic
because there's no Hitler staring Us in the face
at the moment so that's the obvious historical
parallel there's systems of Warring ideas and
and you're you're on the Christian side of
that war let's say you said dare to call
themselves Christian which is an interesting uh an
interesting phrase so let's start let's start with
your description of some of the books that you've
written is that you know they were inspired you
know and my sense is that you can separate out an
attempt to write a book for instrumental Reasons
from an attempt to write a book to put forth
what you believe to be true right now they're
mingled a little bit because you you sort
of have to select your audience although
when I wrote myself everything is by definition
mingled there's there's no yeah there's no getting
around that unless unless you know a a demon is
speaking and you're doing automatic ghost writing
or something like that in other words the we are
created in God's image and inevitably you can say
this about the New Testament itself about the
New and Old Testaments I mean they're inspired
but Paul does not erase his personality to
speak uh for God God created Paul with his
personality so that God could use the medium of
the human being that is Paul to to say what God
has to say so it's it's different from you
know there are people I know who will hear
the voice of God they will hear God speak a
sentence or speak a scripture or something
um I'm not talking about that uh that happens
but that didn't happen to me for me it was and
it's a funny thing it's like develop a muscle
where you become increasingly sensitive to uh
you're able to use it and and I think literally
over the decades I've become more sensitive
to um to um in other words in the past I
think uh you know I've since I became a
Christian uh you know rather dramatically in
1988 I have all I wanted every moment God to
use me to to use me in my gifts uh uh which are
strange and various and I and I've always uh
assumed that that he would and that he was doing
that and in the various books that I've written
and the various things that I've done even in the
jokes that I've cracked that God is with me but um
over the over the years I've become a little bit
more sensitive to these moments where I feel I
would say you know God is particularly in this I
can sort of feel it it's almost like a highlighter
going over something the words are the same but
you could sort of see this highlighted the text
is highlighted or something like that I don't mean
that specifically with with my books I'm speaking
about talking about my thoughts and things that
I think that these these thoughts feel like God
is uh particularly behind them could I be vager
I'll try no no no no no no this is a hard thing
to get right so you know there's going to be
some wandering about in the darkness trying to
get it right I mean one of the things I try to do
when I'm speaking and also when I'm writing is to
feel I I would I wouldn't use a visual metaphor
for me it's more like feeling my way forward
for toe holes I the image that always comes
to mind for me is walking across a swamp
of dirty water where there's Stone
pathway underneath and then you can
feel out with my feet if the next
thing I'm standing on is well water
or or crocodile or or solid ground and I'm
always searching for that sense of solidity
but it's interesting there's a presupposition in
what you're saying that there is a path forward
there's a right way in a wrong way and that's
that's a presupposition that you've just put
out there in other words you operate with that
piece of position there's such a thing as truth
and I don't want to get it wrong and that
alone is right is a big thing to to put
that out there right well I would say that
well I agree well it's truth right well I
think that's Akin in some ways to to your claim
that you're you're attempting to be directed by
as close as you can manage to divine inspiration
when you're writing I mean it isn't it isn't a
set of axiomatic statements like I do believe but
forgive me for interrupting but it's gonna it's
gonna sound like I'm claiming that that I'm being
led by God and everything I write I don't want to
say that I'm just basically I'm I'm a writer I'm
a speaker I do my best the only time uh I felt
something more palpable of of God's inspiration
was in writing a letter to the American church I
I felt like I've never written anything as
as sobering and Urgent and so I had a more
keen sense that I really need to get this right
because what I'm saying is so serious and and so
urgent uh so but I don't want to imply that there
was anything uh mystical about it or that every
word was uh you know chosen by God but I just
had I suppose a sense of humility something
there is something I suppose
mystical about that intuition that
there's a distinction between words that
are false and words that are true yeah and
it isn't easy exactly to describe how you know
the difference I mean you know the difference
the way you know the difference between truth and
falsehood if you do in fact know that difference
and haven't clouded your mind up too bad it's
no different than the instinct to know what's
it it's no different really than the instinct
to know what's funny if you're a jokester right
right I am to know the timing of why would
it be funnier if I hesitate if I if I if I
if I if I stutter the phrase uh why will it be
funnier that the timing all those things are
instincts that uh we all develop in our various
ways through life or at least ideally we that
we would so it has something to do with that it
becomes it doesn't feel conscious uh it it feels
like something that it's it's an inner knowing
a sense of of things but uh I mean I've I've had
numerous genuinely mystical experiences uh
miraculous experiences um but that's not what
I'm talking about here here I'm talking about just
what it is to be a writer uh but as I say it kind
of became pointed with letter to the American
church because of the seriousness of what I was
writing well okay so let's let's turn to that
now because of the seriousness of what you were
writing and you pointed specifically to the events
of the last three years and this is probably we'll
get this whole discussion canceled on YouTube by
the way good because that's increasingly happening
yeah well three they've taken three of my videos
down in the last month by the way um so um what
is it exactly that you think is afoot why do you
think it's akin to the source of things that were
happening while the totalitarian state was rising
in Germany and you've just you've just said it
the YouTube canceling your your conversations how
extraordinarily Preposterous and sick is that it's
mind-bending that in the west we would have some
Arbiters out there deciding what is okay and what
is not okay that's despicable as speaking as an
American it is profoundly anti-American I think
of the blood of patriots who died for freedom for
freedom of speech so it is on the one hand deeply
offensive to me in that way but as a human being
it's deeply offensive to me uh as a Christian
it's offensive to me because I believe that we
are all free to speak truth so the idea that
we would be alive at a Time in the West where
in places like Canada and America and the West
somebody would dare would dare to be shutting
down what you and I and most people know
are perfectly wonderful conversations we know that
it's not like well yeah I guess they had a point
they had less than no point and by my show the
Eric matax's show was flourishing on YouTube uh
getting more and more subscribers I'm very
eclectic so uh I'm you know some of it is
comedy some of it is serious discussions about
faith some of it is politics some of it is I'm
interviewing uh uh authors about their books
two years ago I dared to have Naomi wolf who
was one of my classmates at Yale uh liberal
feminist I had her on the show I interviewed
to talk about I know yeah to talk about yeah
vaccine I didn't even choose the subject
I had a few other people on the show to talk
about some things but the show was not focused
you know on on those kinds of things but you too
wiped my program out completely didn't just take
some videos down wiped the entire program the
Erica Texas show ceased to exist on YouTube
and I thought to myself if you're standing back
objectively looking at the situation you'd say
well that's interesting why would they do that
in other words this is not uh this doesn't look
good for the people at YouTube they look like
fascists they are acting in a fascist way they
are globalists they are uh cultural marxists but
of course there's a good dose of fascism in there
they don't believe in Freedom they don't believe
in free speech they have an agenda and they have
tremendous power which they are now using because
as we all know they are scared to death of the
truth they are so scared that they're willing
to look like the monsters that they are because
they have nothing left to lose so when we say
what are the parallels to to Germany in the
30s you don't suppose that in 1933 most people
knew what was coming nobody could have dreamed
of the death camps I mean they didn't discuss
the final solution for another eight years uh
nobody saw what was coming but people with eyes
to see people like Dietrich Bonhoeffer they could
smell this they said um if you follow the dots
they lead in this direction the people who are
seizing power now and being allowed to seize
power now by cowardly people by confused people
those people trying to seize power when they get
the power they're going to use it for very Wicked
ends their presuppositions are the antitheses
of our presuppositions they are atheistic they
don't believe in good or evil they only believe
in power and and the cultural Elites the globalist
cultural Elites today are working with the same
presuppositions they couldn't care less about the
things that most of us would would take for
granted the Dignity of the human being the
sanctity of Life all of these things that people
have uh lived for and died for they are not only
uh not interested in those ideas they're at war
with those ideas and so there are you know some
parallels that we can make and some that we can
make but but basically we you and I have never
seen anything like this in the west and it's it's
it's astonishing the speed at which these things
have been happening in the last week YouTube
took down my discussion about what is a woman
and Associated issues in that direction with Matt
Walsh and they took down a video that was a year
old that I did with Helen Joyce who's an economist
journalist and a very credible person on the
trans minor surgery scandals in the UK which have
resulted in the change of a number of UK policies
not that podcast specifically but those issues
but most relevant as far as I'm concerned they
took down a discussion I had with Robert F Kennedy
and the reason for that in principle was he veered
into the vaccination criticism domain and you know
it's not like I walk arm and arm across the desert
with Robert F Kennedy I think he's an interesting
person he's a bull in the china shop just like
Trump and God only knows what he's up to or what
he'll do but but here's the issue he's running for
president and he's in the middle of a presidential
campaign and YouTube took down one of his videos
and I'm looking at this from outside my country
Canada is as screwy as you can possibly imagine
and then some but I never expected to see this
in the United States that a corporation would
interfere with an ongoing presidential candidates
in the United States is it I mean when you're
dealing with Google any of these companies they
are and this is an interesting thing and this is
why if you're a [__] for money you don't care
whether someone is patriotic or has any Fidelity
to American principles and most people most
politicians don't care uh but we need to care
so the idea that you would have Google uh allying
itself with China and uh you know as I say why
for money okay what could be more difficult well
you know I well no no I can tell you something
that's more Despicable than that I think that if
you're whoring for money so to speak that there's
actually something predictable and admirable
about that and let me lay the argument out
okay partly because if I know that you were are
actually motivated by money and even if that's
your single there's there's nothing wrong with
being motivated by that but you you and I know
that there are limits if somebody says um you
know it's like that scene in the third man uh
if I know I can make a certain amount of money
Orson welles's character you know if a few of
those people disappear who cares in other words
this has always been the question right somebody
says well you you can make a lot of money but
it's going to involve you're aligning yourself
with people who are torturing and murdering and
sexually abusing people are you okay with that
most people would say I hope no some people say
well I don't know um but the point is what we're
talking about right now is people who are looking
the other way they would gladly do business with
slave Traders they would gladly do business with
the Nazis if they could make a buck they cynically
some of them believe listen if I'm not going
to make a buck here someone else will I might
as well make a buck and that's what we're dealing
with now with all of these globalist corporations
well I think it's worse on the YouTube front
because they've left me alone up till now
and I think that what they're doing to buttress
their ideology is actually counterproductive at
least in this situation on the economic front the
thing that frightens me about the YouTube video
log types is that I think that they would act
even against their own narrow economic self-inter
correct push their damage well that's what I mean
by worse if you're honestly greeting I agree with
you no no no no okay I agree with you okay but the
point is it's mixed the point is yes when Hitler
uh took over in in the 30s um some people
it's just like today's exactly like today
because this is human nature they simply
didn't want quote unquote any trouble so
they were willing to look the other way
when something bad was happening there
were some people didn't want to lose their job so
there's an economic thing but the point is evil
never operates in a vacuum it works with
things like human interest and the question is
there's this amalgam of things going on for some
it's purest greed how much money can Pfizer and
Company make they don't give a damn about
the side effects or the what they're people
who are in it for the money and there's so much
money that they're willing to look the other way
there are other people who are pulling the
levers uh other people that uh couldn't
possibly need more money whether it's
George Soros or Bill Gates so it's an
amalgam of things and we're dealing with all
these things we're asking the question how
does evil operate that's how evil operates in
in every kind of way and every single person
has a choice whether to participate or to say
I refuse to participate I would rather do the
right thing uh and trust God with the results and
that's why in letter to the American church I'm
writing specifically to those people Christians
who claim uh to believe in in the god of the
Bible to believe that Jesus defeated death on the
cross well if you believe that you are going to
presumably behave differently uh because you
believe that because you have okay so you said
okay you said something core there you know
um and I finally scored to no no no no no no
no no we're just getting closer and closer to the
point which is a good thing to do in a discussion
so you you're implying and also stating explicitly
a theory of Christianity and one of the key points
that you just made was that if you have faith
which by the way I think is a form of courage
it's a form of existential courage it's a decision
to stake yourself on something you will you said
do the right thing and let God care take care
of the consequences okay so my understanding
of that is that I've been I've been trying to
conceptualize faith I suppose to some degree and
you know the atheist types and the materialists
think that faith is the willingness to suspend
disbelief in the service of a fairy tale and I
think that faith is something entirely different
than that I think it's the willingness to stake
yourself on the truth in the faith that whatever
happens when you tell the truth is the best thing
that could possibly happen and not regardless of
the short-term consequences right because people
lie because they want to manipulate the short-term
consequences they think they can get away with it
they think they'll gain something from it okay so
I think no no you tell the truth and sometimes
you're going to pay a price for that but it's
nowhere near as much of a price as you're bloody
well going to pay if you lie now you might be too
stupid and willfully blind and naive and crooked
and devious and deceptive to understand that but
doesn't mean you're right so this so you said
do the right thing and let God take care of
the consequences well that's the statement of
faith now this letter you wrote is that the
message that you're sending to the to the American
church are you telling people say what you believe
to be the case or suffer the consequences
is it or is that is that the central issue
uh in a word yes yes uh those were that was two
words but it was the same word so it counts as one
word yes uh that's the thesis if someone claims
uh to believe in the god of the Bible which I do
um then there's no question that God requires of
us to behave as though we believe what we claim
to believe and one of the Theses of my book letter
to the American church is that just as the German
Church drifted tragically um in its conception
of what is Faith so to the American church has
drifted in other words they have adopted a kind
of uh Enlightenment rationalist view of faith
faith is what I believe which means what I what I
believe intellectually I sent to I assent to these
ideas so I ticked these boxes these theological
boxes somebody says what do you believe and they
say well go go to the website of my church there's
a statement of faith that's what I believed well
that's a fig Leaf it does not fool God it does
not fool the devil if you actually believe
what the Bible says what the Nicene Creed says if
you actually believe those things you will behave
as though you believe those things it will
affect your life you will live with courage
um because you know too much not to live with
courage you're afraid of living fearfully so
I thought to myself that idea Bonhoeffer wrote a
book uh the cost of discipleship where he famously
talks about cheap Grace because the excuse given
by the Germans uh the theologians and and pastors
at the time was that well uh it's all about
Grace it's it's less about what we do because
Luther said oh we're not saved by our works well
congratulations you're correct you're not saved by
your Works however there is a little scripture in
the Epistle of James that says faith without works
is dead in other words if you're foolish enough to
believe that you can have faith and not events it
in how you live then you're a fool then actually
biblically you have no faith and so I think that
that bad idea about Grace and Faith which you
know we we get and again these are always you
know these are good ideas taken to extremes right
oh you know faith is what I believe uh yes that's
that's a nice idea but it can become unmoored from
the reality that what you believe has to be lived
out it has to be an integral part of of who you
are it has to be holistic and and the Germans were
particularly guilty of this and what I'm saying is
that the American church is particularly guilty of
this today and it's always manifested in the idea
that oh we shouldn't be political and I thought to
myself what that's preposterous if if if you're
against slavery uh and you you live in the mid
19th century uh people will say oh you're you're
being political just stick to the gospel well
that's what Hitler said to the pastors just stick
to your little your little gospel I'll worry about
the Third Reich I'll worry about everything else
you just worry about your little Theology and that
thin theological view that some Christians have of
what it is to have faith is profoundly wrong it is
unbiblical your theology has to be lived out it
has to be integrated into every part of your life
um and and that's where we have drifted to this
idea that people say I can be against something
in my mind but I don't have to do anything about
it I don't have to live out my life heroically I
don't have to put my life on the line I don't have
to put my career on the line if you believe these
things then of course you have to put your life in
your career on the line otherwise it's obvious you
don't believe these things the Bible is a root
of wisdom inspiration and spiritual nourishment
the Hallow app empowers you to explore the Bible's
profound teachings and to effortlessly incorporate
them into your daily life a great place to start
while you deepen your understanding in the Bible
is to check out father Mike schmitz's Bible in a
year available on the Hallow app exclusively for
brief daily readings and Reflections here you can
dive into an extensive library of Bible reading
plans accompanied by insightful Reflections
and audio guided meditations whether you're
a seasoned Bible reader or just starting your
journey hallow provides a platform for you to
engage with scripture like never before studying
the Bible's literary Brilliance has influenced
countless writers poets and artists throughout
history by studying the Bible yourself you'll
gain a deeper appreciation for the power of
Storytelling symbolism and metaphor enriching
your understanding of literature across different
genres the Hallow app also helps you connect with
a community of like-minded individuals sharing
experiences insights and encouragement along the
path to spiritual growth download the app
for free at hallow.com Jordan you can set
reminders and track your progress along the
way enrich your education and nurture your
mind and soul today download the Hallow app at
hallow.com Jordan that's hallow.com Jordan for
an exclusive free month free trial of all
six thousand plus prayers and meditations
Okay so The Works issue this is how I understand
it you tell me what you think about this if you
would so what I thought Luther was trying to
establish and I think this is wise is that just
because you have the Privileges of a king doesn't
mean that you're uh what walking the road to the
to the kingdom of heaven right the mere fact that
you've been provided with or perhaps even earned
that's more complicated with a certain degree of
material Prosperity isn't uh a signal message from
God that you are on the right side of things
so you can't confuse works with Grace or with
Redemption and you can't assume that someone who's
rich is a more moral agent than someone who's poor
merely because they have plenty so that's the
point I think Luther was trying to make that's
my I actually I wrote a uh 450 Page biography
of Luther uh and nowhere in my book do I touch
on that idea so I think it may follow from some of
what Luther says but I don't think principally he
I mean what you just said is an important point
but I don't get it from Luther I mean I get it
from other places he he doesn't seem to me ever
to have worried about that that doesn't seem to be
uh on on the list of things he was dealing with uh
yeah well I could walk back my claim I I would say
then in that that my understanding is that that's
the underlying rationale of the Protestant claim
that you're not saved by works it's more that the
works themselves and their manifestation aren't
inevitable proof of of what would you say God's
appreciation for your existence all right let me
let me uh let me put it this way the the point and
I think my dear friend Dennis Prager and I would
would differ on this and it came out in your
conversation with him but I think the idea uh
you know one of the principal ideas of the New
Testament and one of the principal things that
Jesus was trying to say to clarify you know uh why
uh many of the religious leaders of his time were
off was that um what you what you think uh your
inner life is vital is is is Central so if you
write a big check to some wonderful charity um
yes it counts it goes to to help you know medical
research for uh cancer in children yes that's
there's a reality there but if in your heart
you only did it uh to impress some woman that
you want to sleep with God sees that he doesn't
just grade you on the externals he's interested
in your heart in the disposition of your heart
um and so so Luther uh I mean there's so much
to there's so much to Luther but I think the the
issue is that Luther was making this distinction
what what he was worried about was this idea that
uh you know you go through the mumbo jumbo and
the rigmarole of the church and that's all that
counts and he was saying no no no no no no uh it
is your faith that counts and in other words right
and you're and you're making an existential case
in some ways for that Faith which is that it's
not Ascent to a series of explicit propositions
but a mode of conducting yourself in the world
and part of that mode is that you say what
you you say what strikes you as true that's
what you do that's how you live your life and
if you do that well that's part parcel well it
reveals Christian faith yes it reveals that you
a that you believe there's such a thing as truth
and B that you believe that the
author of that truth who is god
um is with you in this in other words you don't
say well hey I'm just gonna I'm just gonna do
this because it's the noble thing it's like no
no I believe in a reality where God is with me
and only with me when I speak the truth and live
the truth and I can trust him with the results
um trust yourself how do you trust yourself
like so fair enough I I buy the argument I I
think it's I think it's accurate I think it's the
most accurate argument some ways but then you come
to the next problem which is well there's God and
then there's you and you're just a confused human
being and so how the hell how do you take steps to
ensure that your judgment about what constitutes
the truth is reliable even in your own eyes
well first of all you have to want it to be
you have to care you you have to uh have enough
humility to know that you could get it wrong
um and therefore to cast yourself on God and
say Lord help me because I know that I'm a
fallen sinful uh human being I got that much
that's clear to me and so it without your help
I will screw this up um so so it's it's um this is
part and parcel of what it is to be free you know
that that it comes with risks you can get it wrong
but to be cynical and not to try to get it right
is really wicked so this cheap Grace you talked
about too which so so I have this interpretation
of I'm sure it's not unique to me but of one of
The Commandments which is do not use the lord's
name in vain and people like to think that means
don't swear and I think in a very trivial sense
that is what it means but what it really
means as far as I can tell is don't pretend
to be doing the work of the Divine when you're
Feathering your own nest right and I really
see this as a particularly egregious sin of
the times pride is the sin of the times and
so is deception pride and lies and of course I
think those are the two canonical sins in some
real sense but this notion of easy moral virtue
almost everything I see on the ideological side
appears to me to be an attempt to Proclaim moral
virtue and the accompanying status and perhaps
even the pathway to Redemption without doing any
of the work at all and I think the universities
are terribly complicit in this because what
they basically tell students is the secular
equivalent I think of what you're complaining
about on the Christian side which is well you
don't really have to be a good person which
by the way is a very difficult thing to do
um and the consequence of not doing that is any
everyone ends up in hell but you don't really have
to be a good person you just have to be against
the right things and conveniently that'll require
um you know a little protesting on your part and
conveniently it will enable you to to what would
you say see the devil and everyone else and not
in yourself at all and then you've paid your price
and you can trumpet your moral virtue and Away
you go down the road all of which is a satanic
counterfeit of the truth uh I I was at Yale in the
80s and I saw this for the first time I grew up
in a working class home um uh no one had gone to
college so here I am uh at Yale and for the first
time I saw that we didn't know the term virtue
signaling but it was all there already in yeah
so yeah what are you taking in the in the Academy
I was taking penicillin but we can't talk about
that just kidding just kidding no I was I was uh
I guess that's how you Canadians put it I was uh
I was an English major uh oh yeah yeah English
literature at Yale yeah but but the thing is
that that concept well I managed uh to avoid uh
critical theory and and all that although I did
once escort Jacques derida across a courtyard with
an umbrella I wrote a poem about it but the point
is that while I was there for the first time I
saw the virtue signaling and I was taken in by
it I was young and naive and and foolish and I
for the first time saw you don't say this you
say this uh be careful about this but you know we
we don't say Oriental we say Asian we say this is
what we're supposed to believe that we're all of
that kind of stuff and I kind of thought oh well
you know to get along because I I have to yes but
it was there in in strength in the 80s already and
of course it filtered its way down down down into
the culture and right right from Yale and right
from The English Department as a matter well
that's true that's quite that's quite right
quite right yeah it's unpleasant to talk about
so let's avoid it but but um the point is that
it is ultimately I mean there's great irony irony
is is the happy way of putting it it's it's uh
think about this you're dealing with cultural
Marxism they don't believe in God they don't
believe in truth they don't believe in good or
evil they believe in nothing but power but somehow
they have to cannibalize truth and they have to
talk about things like racism and they have to
talk about things like that's right and that's
wrong and we care about the marginalized and of
course what we want to ask is excuse me why do
you care about those things in others you say
racism is wrong I agree but I know why it's wrong
why do you say that it's wrong if you don't get
your values from the Bible which says that we're
all created equal in God's image if you get your
values from quote unquote science and blind
Darwinism then who's to say that some people
aren't more evolved than others in other words
according to what you claim to believe you have
zero basis on which to make any claims about
morality about what's right or wrong so you're
gaslighting all of us you're telling us shut up
don't ask questions do this don't do that don't
say this don't say that and everybody is kind
of uh bullied into going along with it oh okay
okay but we ought to say excuse me you know not
only are you wrong about everything you're not
you don't even have any basis on which to make
any of these claims so the idea that this was
uh born in you know derida Foucault critical race
Theory critical theory uh gram sheet this kind of
bubbles its way through the decades until here we
are living with Madness on every front we are to
be pro-reality is to be a radical in this day and
age to be a revolutionary and a radical is to be
pro-reality so let me throw another idea at you
so I've been doing a lot of writing and thinking
about the biblical stories well for a very long
time and very intensely recently and I've spent
many many hundreds of hours I suppose thinking
about the story of Cain and Abel which is a story
that never ceases to terrify me right to my core
and what you see in that story is the the story
of two principalities making themselves manifest
in some way for the first time right so you have
Abel who makes the proper sacrifices who dedicates
himself to God who looks upward and does what's
actually necessary and true and reaps the benefit
as a consequence and then you have Cain who you
know he's not so much into the sacrifice thing
and his sacrifices are second raid and he's trying
to pull the wool over the eyes of God and that
doesn't work out very well and so then he calls
God on God's misbehavior and says to him I don't
know what sort of Cosmos you think you hacked
together here but I'm busting myself in pieces
and all I get is misery why don't you straighten
yourself up and God says well if you did things
properly things would probably go okay for you
and that makes Cain murderously angry and envious
and resentful and bitter and cynical and so then
he goes and kills Abel and I think that's exactly
what's happening today is that what we point to
as Marxism is just the most recent rational
manifestation of the eternal spirit of Cain
I think that's accurate I think you're a
pretty sharp cookie I think you're ready to
go professional uh honestly that's the one all in
man you no but I mean that's that's a wonderful uh
exegesis I I had never thought of that really but
uh it seems to me dead on and I think that it only
took me 40 years to think it through yes well but
it's but but the thing is what you just said uh
I don't remember your phrasing but it's the same
thing over and over and over again in other words
we're talking about human nature right and in fact
you see this happen even earlier in scripture uh
than Cain and Abel when uh when Adam and Eve
make for themselves aprons of fig leaves right
in other words that's the first religious act
religious in the negative sense let's fool God uh
we know something's wrong okay so all human beings
throughout history have known something is wrong
uh how do we address it well that's what religion
is right we say that there's this gulf between us
and the gods there's this uh break uh how do we
deal with that well that that's what religions
purport to do to to somehow repair the breach or
to climb the ladder uh from here to there we know
we're not there we need to get there to to Heaven
uh to to some place other than here how do we do
that how do we appease the Gods uh how do we lure
the Gods uh into coming to our Aid that's what
religion is and in our hearts we we we we we often
do it in a way that there's there's deception
notice it's like well how do I fool God Adam and
Eve say we're going to cover our nakedness with
with with fig leaves now which apparently aren't a
very good covering I talked to Matthew pejo about
that and fig leaves turn out to be not exactly
the sort of leaf with any that anyone with any
any sense would ever use to cover themselves so
it's a pathetic attempt as well as a deceptive
attempt well it's it it I didn't I didn't know
that nor is it relevant but since it's your show
we're going to let that ride let me tell you why
the Fig leaves are insufficient God then this is
just an amazing thing you've probably seen this
but I'm I'm fascinated by this that in the first
few verses of Genesis it shows Adam and Eve doing
something to sort of fool God they know something
is wrong because For the First Time Of course
something is wrong they're no longer Walking with
God and they're they've broken the relationship
with God and they try to do something about it and
God deems what they have done insufficient and it
says he makes for them animal skins in other words
blood had to be shed innocent animals had to be
killed and blood had to be shed in order that they
could be covered which is of course a prefiguring
of the sacrifice and the death of Jesus blood has
to be shed you think you can cover these mistakes
on your own with these little religious acts and
things and God says no no you don't understand
the depth of the horror blood innocent blood
has to be shed to cover what you have done and
of course when you refer to Cain and Abel it's
the same kind of thing I'm trying to do I'm trying
to do this and this this and God and God says no
this is what's required right it has to be a real
sacrifice that's able sacrifice crisis right and
there are also sacrifices that involve blood so
imagine where we are to today that you have people
um I mean they've effectively created a false
religion which is particularly horrifying and
wicked uh it's it's almost like a you know
we're we're seeing it now with the with the
with the sheer lunacy of the The Pride uh
Juggernaut you know that everybody has to
be bullied into agreeing with what whatever
it is and not agree but it's celebrating and
worshiping yes if you don't say Heil Hitler
loud enough people will look at you funny
um why you you seem to say Heil Hitler with
some trepidation Perhaps Perhaps you don't
like the fuhrer uh you know in other words
if if you don't heartily express uh Your
Enthusiasm and approval of X Y and Z people
look at you funny and so if you don't have any
um connection to God or to truth or to reality
then you you look around and go oh what what do
I need to do so that people won't look at me
funny so that I might not lose my job or lose
my friends what do I need to do what do I need
to post on social media what what how do I need
to uh you know out before what do I have to not
say and so that's again you know you see this all
through history uh but the reason I wrote letter
to the American church is because you know it's
my thesis that Christians have no excuse uh
in this you claim to believe in the ground of
all being you claim to believe in the god of the
Bible that he you know not just died for you but
literally bodily rose from the dead and defeated
to death if you believe that which you claim to
you will behave differently you will behave
fearlessly as Martyrs and others have throughout
the centuries that's what's required of us
and we've been kind of drifting along with
everything you know pretty fine we kind of
thought like well we don't we don't actually
have to give our lives or or maybe lose our
jobs or whatever you have a lot of pastors
um you know to put this even uh more pointedly
who they're worried about maybe losing their
501c3 tax deductible status by saying something
vaguely political from the pulpit and I thought
what kind of cowards can you be you're supposed
to be speaking truth you're supposed to care about
people out there not just in your congregation but
out there in the world so that if you were alive
in slavery times you would be speaking against
this satanic abomination of the slave trade as
Wilberforce did uh and against slavery as people
did and when people say oh you're being political
just stick to theology you say excuse me what
kind of theology do I have what kind of gospel
am I preaching if I don't care about people
who are suffering Horrors if I if I'm silent
everyone's talking about how chat GPT and
artificial intelligence are going to change
the world Microsoft and Google are investing
heavily in AI they're also the same big tech
companies that determine your search results only
now they get to cut out a whole new layer from the
information you see that's why I use expressvpn
to add that layer of protection back between me
and big Tech the expressvpn app hides your unique
IP address on all of your devices this makes it
much more difficult for big Tech to identify who
you are expressvpn is so easy to use all I have to
do is tap one button on my phone or computer to
turn it on and that's it but expressvpn doesn't
just protect me from Big Tech it also encrypts
100 of my online traffic keeping me safe from
hackers and prying eyes and the best part is one
expressvpn subscription covers up to five devices
at the same time so stop letting big Tech Leach
onto your data freely by visiting expressvpn.com
Jordan that's exp r e s s vpn.com Jordan and get
three extra months free if expressvpn.com Jordan
in Canada and I burst onto the scene I supposed
to speak so to speak in 2016 it was on this trans
issue peripherally but for me it was the
government was mandating a certain form of
speech right the government said well here's the
words you have to use and I thought there's no
goddamn way I'm letting you bikers take control
of my tongue because I know what happens when
that happens and what happens is everyone ends up
in hell and although it's sort of like hell being
in Trudeau's Canada it's not as bad as it could
get but it'll certainly get there if everybody
holds their tongue when they have something to say
I've been reading Jonah so here's something cool
right and you tell me what you think about this
it's sort of like the Cain and Abel situation so
God comes to Jonah and says well you got some
things to say there buddy get yourself to the
city and make some noise and Jonah being a very
wise man thinks up yours God I'm going the other
direction like anyone sensible would right right
and so he jumps on a boat right and away he goes
but the storms rise eyes and he admits his sins
and the sailors throw him overboard and then you
think well that's pretty rough on poor Jonah God
told him to SPO to speak and he was silent now
he's going to drown and then you'd read and you
think oh well drowning would have been real good
for Jonah because the next thing that happens is
the worst possible Creature from the darkness of
the Abyss comes up and pulls him to the bottom of
reality itself where he cooks away for three days
and so you don't just end up in the damn water
you end up in hell if you shut your mouth when
you have something to say you've just given it
a vaguely jungian gloss which I will pretend not
to notice um honestly uh these stories I mean
I don't know how to respond except to say yes
uh again wonderful exegesis and look these
stories which are from sacred scripture are
their uh they're fathomless you know the meaning
truth I mean it just uh it's I I run a series
um a conversation series called Socrates in the
city um and the idea is Socrates uh you know being
Greek I had to uh name in soccer season City but
Socrates said the unexamined life is not worth
living now he was not a Christian but he had the
good sense to believe that there's probably this
thing called Truth we could probably arrive at it
by asking questions and honestly trying to answer
the questions and that again there's a pre
supposition that that Socrates has and he
says it's worth risking and it's worth examining
Our Lives when he says the unexamined life is is
not worth living and I think you know you have
to be a particularly fearful shallow person to
say I don't have time for that I just want to
get by tell me what I need to do how many Jews
do I need to kill how many blacks do do I need
to enslave like you tell me what I need to do
oh do I need to say this oh no now today I need
to say the opposite of that just tell me what
in other words the idea that you would you know
sell your soul for a mess of pottage to go back
to your Cain and Abel reference it's an amazing
thing and I I think if we're honest we know we
are all guilty of that to some extent but to the
extent that you are aware of your guilt you want
to wake up others and that's what I I'm hoping
to do is to say folks those of you who claim to
be Christian this is again I I write all of my
books for everyone and I can make the case for
why I believe in the Christian faith but I'm
talking in this last book led to the American
Church specifically to those who already claim to
believe this and I say listen if you believe this
you're on the hook for for actually leading the
way in leading in in in leading the way in showing
people what courage looks like in showing people
that no no there is this thing called Truth and we
are made uh to speak truth and to act truth and we
believe that you know what even if I lose my life
I don't lose my life but you know Bonhoeffer uh
famously when he was being led to the Gallows
you know he he knew that he says you know this is
this is the end but for me the beginning of Life
if you know that Jesus has risen from the dead you
know that this is not all there is you're going to
live dramatically differently than someone who's
scared to death of dying um and so what I'm saying
to those who claim to be Christians today is you
ought to be leading the way you pastors ought to
be shouting this from your pulpits fearlessly all
of these lies uh all of these efforts to silence
us are satanic and by the way they are harming
human beings just as the Silence of the Pastors in
Germany led to the uh you mean double mastectomies
you mean those human beings that is one
prominent example if you care about them and by
the way God commands us to care about them and
to love them then you will speak up for them if
you don't you're not loving them and God judges
you as guilty and he will hold you to account
because you claim to Believe In The God Who says
you're supposed to care about them so that's
one issue one very dramatic you know there's
also there's a a line I was just writing about
this the other day about stripes and so Christ
says if you do not know and you transgress it's
something like that you will be punished with a
certain burden of Stripes but if you know and you
sin then you will be punished much more harshly
and this is the situation the Christians you're
addressing actually should find themselves in
because they've already made this claim to know
right they've already made this claim to Faith
and are attempting to accrue the status that goes
along with that and some of them actually do know
you know that they need to tell the truth or else
and the the notion there is that if you do already
know that and you still lie um you're going to be
punished much more harshly than those who lie who
are also ignorant and I believe that's also true I
certainly saw that my clinical practice if because
it's partly because if you lie there's a sin there
obviously because you go off the path but if you
know you're lying and you're transgressing against
your own moral code then not only are you lying in
the moment but you're betraying your innermost
self right you're betraying your ultimate core
in the most real sense and you are absolutely 100
percent going to pay for that and so is everybody
around you this is what verified me I want to
ask you why you became a Christian like what
terrifies me into religious submission it just
seem like this thing yeah okay well you went
to Yale and you're in the English Department
and that was before you had a conversion what
happened to you what happened in the conversion
and why did you switch your tune laughs that's
the funniest way of putting it that I've ever
heard thank you for that why did I switch my tune
um yeah I was you know I was raised in the
Greek Orthodox church and I had a vague Faith
um at Yale which is extraordinarily was then
and of course is now dramatically more secular
hostile to genuine biblical Faith um hostile
to uh the ideas the American ideas of freedom
and so on and so forth I uh you know foolishly
drank that Kool-Aid and drifted into um genuine
agnosticism and I was dramatically lost I was
really um you know I wasn't some proud atheistic
sinner I was just lost uh and um ultimately
we could talk about this later but ultimately
um I found myself horror of Horrors moving back in
with my parents my European immigrant uh parents
who had worked menial jobs to put me through Yale
University and they're kind of looking at me like
so why are you back here again what are you doing
here but I was totally lost and in that season of
my life I was 24 I got this horrible menial job
uh as a proofreader at Union Carbide in Danbury
Connecticut the uh the Hebrew word is gehenna it
was awful and and in that misery I met someone
who began to share his faith with me and I was
initially hostile or at least not wanting to
hear it uh for for many many months and long story
short around my 25th birthday uh I had a dramatic
miraculous dream uh in which in a nutshell God
spoke to me so unequivocally that there was no
going back it was game over I say it's like
going to sleep single and waking up married
would you tell me the dream now sure um it's it's
actually hard to do justice to it um it it uh
it it encompasses three parts of my life part
of the reason it was so staggering to me as
I was having this dream because I don't I don't
dream very much and I had never ever had a dream
anything like this this was a this was another
category of dream it was like having a vision
in the context of a dream I was
unconscious of course I was sleeping but
um I have to say a couple of things for the for
background so you get the vocabulary number one
grew up uh as the son of immigrants my father
from Greece uh you know very like most Greeks
inordinately proud of being Greek and wanting
to uh raise his kids in in that tradition and
so that was a very important part of my growing up
that I am Greek that I uh this is my my identity
um once uh my father uh we were at a light I
mean I I I I I still drive there today and at
this light we saw the car in front of us on the
bumper that had one of those you know Chrome fish
this is in the 70s and my father says do you
know what that is and he explains to me that
that's the Greek word for the Greek word for
fish uh is is um is ichthys and it's spelled
um you know it's an acronym well the word is
ichthys so but the early Christians adopted
that symbol of the fish as a symbol of the
Christian faith because the word fish is an
acronym for isus Christos Theos Iman sotir Jesus
Christ the son of God our savior so they use the
symbol of the fish because to them the symbol
of the fish meant ichthys Jesus Christ the son
of God our savior so it's the secret symbol of the
Christians and my father was you know thrilled to
tell me that's a Greek word and that's where that
comes from uh and so I always Associated that fish
with with Christ after I saw that so again it's
by way of background fishing was very important
to me growing up also I should say that you know
if I had a hobby other than like watching sitcoms
um it was uh it was fishing that was very
important to me so you like so all things up from
the depths don't get young in on me you do that
on your own time okay so so yeah yeah of course so
um basically uh around this 25th birthday if you
said who are you you know in your guts it was well
the Greek background and my family was vitally
Central to who I was secondly this idea of fishing
this was this was my main my only hobby the thing
that I did when I when I had time but thirdly the
life of the mind when I went to Yale suddenly I
cared about the meaning of life and I really was
an English major I realized even somewhat at the
time because I'm trying to figure out the nature
of Reality by reading these great novels in the
western Canon I'm putting together these pieces to
figure out what is the nature of reality what is
the meaning of life and I was actually doing that
uh without doing it particularly intentionally
it was just instinctively the life of the mind
um and I came up and I have to say
this so then the dream will make sense
I came up with um you know as only a
pretentious undergraduate could do I
I think I've I've got to figure it out uh
that uh it's it's kind of like a literary
Trope it's an image of of a frozen lake uh and
what all religions world religions mean to do
is so this is where it becomes Freudian
and jungian and you must forgive me but
the idea of a Frozen like I thought this is a
perfect image for what religion tries to do you
have this ice on the top of the lake which is like
the conscious mind the ice is the conscious mind
and our goal is to drill through the ice to touch
the water which is the collective unconscious we
want to touch the Divinity the godhead again
Jung's idea not the Bible's idea but but this
idea that uh that's what God is the collective
unconscious so I had this image that I developed
you know as an undergraduate like okay so that's
what all religions are trying to do they're trying
to drill through the conscious mind to touch the
other side to touch the collective unconscious
which is the kind of new age idea of the Divinity
the godhead whatever that is so I I bring all
of this you know into my 24th year and around
my 25th birthday have this dream in the dream
I'm standing on a frozen lake Candlewood Lake in
Danbury Connecticut I'm ice fishing with friends
and I look at the whole in the ice and I see what
you never see if you're ice fishing I see a fish
pointing its snout out of the hole and I look
at it and I reach down and I lifted up by the
Gill because it was a a pickle or a pike they
have very sharp teeth and you'd never lipland a
fish like that so I I pick it up and in the dream
I lift it up and it's a large uh pickerel or Pike
and anybody who knows that fish knows
that it has a kind of bronze coloring but
on that glorious winter day the Sun was
shining brightly the sky couldn't be
Bluer the ice and the snow couldn't have been
whiter and I hold up this fish in the dream
and I see that because of the sun it looks
golden and suddenly in the dream I realize
no it it doesn't just look golden it is
golden it is a golden fish made of gold
like in a fairy tale but it is alive a living
golden fish and in that moment in the dream
God effectively drops this into
my head like in paragraphs I knew
this is God saying to me in this dream you want
it to drill through the ice to touch inert water
to touch the collective unconscious the Divinity
that God had I have something else for you I have
the golden fish ichthys Jesus Christ my son your
savior Jesus Christ how did you know that why
did you make the association between the fish
specifically at that point in Christ what did
that happen in the dream no that's what I'm saying
it happened in the dream I knew but in realization
took place in the dream too the realization took
place within the Dream Within the dream I knew
within the dream that this is Jesus Christ the
son of God our savior I had been searching for
this thing this for to touch in earth water
and God says I'd like to uh I'd like to
um one-up you with your own symbol system I'd
like to give you what you're really looking for
my son your savior Jesus Christ a living being
and when you think about it theologically a
fish coming out of water what is what happens
when a fish comes out of the water it dies um
the idea that God came from his medium to our
medium to die um all of this came clear in the
dream and when I was in the dream holding this
fish I was flooded with joy because what I had
believed you could not know that that the Bible is
true that Jesus is God in the dream I realized no
I I know and as I was holding the fish I realized
I I I I have I have what I'm looking for what I
was looking for which I didn't believe could be
found I this is God he's given himself to me and
in the dream I was flooded with joy within the
dream before I woke up I knew this is true and
I just had this choice so the next day I went and
I told the friend of mine at work the story I said
I had this dream and he says what do you think it
means and I said and I never would have said these
words these words would have made me cringe at any
previous day I said it means I've accepted Jesus
I never would have said that I I Was Made
uncomfortable by people who said that but
uh I knew that I had jumped over the
broomstick uh that I was in another
world that I had accepted Jesus and that's you
know that happened right around my 25th birthday
what happened well that's a great Dream by the
way I mean that's that's quite the archetypal
blast you got there that'll that'll thank you to
fish around in the dark yeah you never know what
you're going to catch yeah I really feel like I'm
talking about Jordan Peterson uh it's it's so yeah
it changes everything I mean I was a different
person from that day forward my life changed
very dramatically how are you different how are
you different what changed about you well the
first uh most immediate uh embar uh somewhat
embarrassing manifestation is I immediately
stopped sleeping with my girlfriend of three
years I knew I I can't do that that's for
marriage and I uh I I want God so that's the
sacrifice well yes and no in the sense that
you know people often say that you you know God
always out gives you that whatever you give up for
him is nothing compared to what he gives you and
I had such a sense of his presence in those first
days of my conversion that I thought I wouldn't
give that up for anything I wouldn't do anything
to hinder that that personal relationship with
the God who loves me and died for me and created
the universe that it it was so beautiful and
extraordinary that you you wouldn't do anything
to screw that up you you just know that that's not
about anything well I mean and again but I have to
be real clear again I was unconscious during this
dream this wasn't like I reasoned my way to this
and I could take any credit or particular pride
this happened to me so this is the definition
of a gift from God uh I I knew it was a gift
from from from God and and I just thought I
don't wanna I don't want to screw that up right
right so how did you change in your behavior you
said you stopped sleeping with your girlfriend
and so is that not good enough for you Jordan
yeah that's pretty dramatic that was pretty that
was pretty dramatic for me at age time I suspect
for your girlfriend too well yes of course that's
that's the thing is is that uh you know we when
you choose God you don't know where that's going
to lead you uh but it really that's the fun of it
well that's that's correct that is the fun of
it because God that's the abrahamic adventure eh
whom we can trust wants to take us on a glorious
Adventure he invites us to this glorious adventure
and when you turn it down you think you're turning
down some kind of bummer and it's like no you
don't understand this is what you were made for
this is the adventure of your of your life it's
uh what's the Pink Floyd line you know and did you
trade a walking a walk-on part in the war for the
lead role in a cage you you're being given uh a
role in in the battle between good and evil which
is real God says come with me on this adventure
participate with me in in in this extraordinary
Adventure you've been given the privilege to to
be on the side of good and Truth in this in this
war and you know you follow uh my banner and you
walk with me and this is what you were created
for and imagine saying no no I want to be the
star of my own show uh you know I want I want
to I Wanna I wanna I want the lead role but you
know as Pink Floyd says lead role in Sex in the
City it's well actually it's it's miltonic right
I mean you know I I'd rather reign in Hell than
serve in heaven what could be more foolish than
that nothing yeah right right absolutely well that
that's that's what I think about Power claims too
it's like because people will say well people who
use power are successful and I think well if
you're ruling over hell and are you the least
successful are you the most successful or the
least successful and it seems to me that the ruler
of hell is actually the least successful person
in hell and that's where you get if you use power
so you might be able to rule but it'll be hell and
you think you're the winner but you're actually
the ultimate loser it's it's actually painful to
contemplate I mean genuinely yes well that's why
you should contemplate it that's exactly right
you know I tried to learn the lesson of the of
the Holocaust because that's what we're enjoined
upon to do right never forget well that means
understand and that means while figuring out how
you take those first steps to hell and then the
next steps and then the next steps and then drag
everyone along with you and you definitely do that
by lying there's no doubt about that well I mean I
became the what you're saying you know the the my
Bonhoeffer book which uh you know it's it's it's
it's a 600 Page biography of a German Pastor who
saw these things happening and knew that he must
speak out against it and he tried to wake up the
church because he knew that God specifically
called the church to be the conscience of the
state you claim to believe this and this and this
and this you must stand against this evil and
we know what happened so the idea that all these
years later something similar could be happening
and how many people have said you know we never
we're never going to repeat that again never gonna
and you ask the question okay how are you going
to prevent it did you learn the lessons did you
learn that there is such a thing as satanic evil
when you look at the Death Grips I mean listen
that's the question isn't that the question they
uncovered the death camps I think most people in
the world couldn't believe it it was too horrible
it was too horrible there's something inside us
that says I I can't take that in and I think
that's what we're facing today uh when Naomi
wolf you know dug into the Pfizer documents and
you look at the evil it's it's too much to take
in it will change you when you see the evil uh
of of the the the Chinese Communist party's Will
To Power it's painful to look at and yet we must
look at it we must deal with it we must ask what
what is the answer uh for us what what are we to
do you know you have to respond you cannot look
the other way but the temptation to look the other
way is dramatically strong and that's what I think
people like you and I are hoping to do is to to
tell people no no God is with you in this don't
be afraid yeah yeah well you can be more you can
even be more pessimistic about it in some ways
you know you can tell people well it's going to be
pretty damn brutal if you tell the truth but boy
you want brutal you just keep lying and see where
you end up that'll be brutal Beyond Your Wildest
imaginings man that's absolutely 100 percent for
sure in the course of writing that this new book
my shortest book letter to the American church
I came to the conclusion that as horrific as it
is to think about what the Silence of the German
Church led to the Silence of the American church
now if we do not repent and begin to speak
out boldly against every one of these things
the result will be worse even if possible
than what happened in the Holocaust yeah
well we're more powerful now so why not think
about the whole 20th century as a trial run
and there were no wiser obviously because people
are still you know what did they say they still
allow the cat to have their tongue it doesn't
matter if I don't say what I believe to be
true it's like yeah well you just keep walking
down that road buddy and see where you end up
so hey so what happened what kind of
response did you get from the church
to your book what kind of or what kind of
response are you still getting who's to say
what the church is but I will tell you that
the response has been um very very positive
um I I'm very happy to say that because I had
no clue I didn't write this book as some career
move or a way to make money I just thought I
have this I must write this but the response
has been extraordinarily positive uh I I am I've
never ever gotten as many speaking invitations uh
people email emailing us daily we I bought 20
copies to give it to every Pastor in my area I
I've been thinking this with the thank you for
saying this and stuff so it's uh in fact later
um next week I'm I'm flying to LA to film a
documentary uh which is this book in in in film
uh form to get the message out to a wider audience
uh because the response has been that dramatic in
fact I spoke about this uh at a church uh in in
California some months ago and some people there
and who are in Hollywood and they said we've got
to make a documentary film of of what you just
said of this book we've got to get this message
out so I can say with cautious optimism that uh
the the response has been genuinely
um better than I had feared uh
better than I had hoped even um and I'm I'm
you can understand why I'd be glad to say
that because I have hope in other words I feel
that there are people joining the battle there
are people understanding you know what I got this
wrong and I see that now I was uh you know in the
early days of covet we shut down our church and
we just did whatever the government told us to
do we we'd never seen this before but you're
seeing first of all um wherever I'm invited
to speak it's usually by some heroic pastor and
the story is the same every single time they say
our numbers in this church have tripled quadrupled
quintupled because we were Brave in in the early
days of covert we kept our church open and people
are flocking to us because they say those people
must know something they they they seem to believe
in Freedom they seem to believe in something and
and and those churches have exploded in numbers
the churches that were playing it safe uh are
withering when Jesus right that's no church
plays it safe no no absolutely not no the
church is a real church is the most dangerous
place you could possibly be well that's right
so that's the safest yeah how weird is that
and I well of course well you know the truth
is paradoxical well that's just the the nature of
things but I have to say that you know it's kind
of like if somebody says to George Washington
in 1776 hey George how do you think it's going
um you know I'm seated here on the very Island uh
uh well actually across the East River which is
not a river um from where they had the Battle of
Brooklyn the Battle of Long Island if you'd said
to George Washington in 1776 how's it going how
do you think it's going to go in the natural his
answer would have been we don't know if Providence
before us and we fight with everything we have
um God may give us the victory but he wouldn't
have said like hey we got this you know it's good
no and that's where we are now we are in a battle
uh for Freedom between good and evil and our job
is to fight our job is to fight and to look to
God for leadership and guidance and the results
are in his hands but the the response to this book
has given me reason uh to hope that we might uh
fight on and might eventually uh win in some ways
and might eventually uh yeah what would a victory
look like you know I've wrote this on the Russian
Ukraine front but let's talk about it on this
front Okay so there's a victory all right so what
are you aiming at what's the victory here what is
that well like compared to what's happening now
the the uh the restoration of uh of this nation
America to um foundational principles uh to the
Constitution the uh the draining of the swamp
that is the Deep State the unelected bureaucrats
who are at war with we the people who are at war
with the freedoms enshrined in our founding
documents uh that would be a big part of it
um the the idea that we would again be free that
I would go to a to vote uh and know that my vote
is genuinely counted I wouldn't doubt that um
there are a host of things that would happen
um our freedom to speak the truth whether it
makes people uncomfortable or doesn't the the our
freedom to question things like is this vaccine a
good idea uh our freedom to question whether there
was chicanery uh in that election I mean that's
basic stuff that we have the freedom to question
these things and people can say you're full of
it and we can say okay let's let's debate it
let's discuss it let's open the books let's look
into it that's so basic and those again those are
foundational principles and uh you know to put it
on a higher plane when Lincoln talked about a new
birth of Freedom uh I think it would look like a
new birth of Freedom uh a re-establishment of uh
of freedom and of the promises uh you know quoting
Martin Luther King Jr no the the promissory notes
of our founding documents we have yet to live out
a lot of that uh in many ways we've gone backwards
in the last 50 or so years and so the the
bureaucratic deep State the these people that have
become authoritarian anti-American anti-freedom
I mean all of that has to be dealt with and
um I think that you know we don't know where it's
going to go but not to try uh not to fight and to
try and to pray and to to do that is just you
know beyond pathetic it's complicity with evil
uh and you know Bonhoeffer didn't say it probably
but it's often associated with him silence in the
face of evil is itself evil not to speak is to
speak not to act is to act God will not hold us
Guiltless there are many people that think like
I'm just gonna take a a third I'm gonna I'm gonna
be neutral yeah and you think no you know what
Christ says about neutral people in the Book of
Revelation right yes that's good Cold's good but
sitting in the middle you better watch the hell
out buddy well it's sort of funny though that
people again this is the parallel phrase no no
he didn't uh but but in Germany this is what a lot
of these religious leaders thought that that well
there's a safe religious path we're just going
to stick to quote unquote preaching the gospel
we don't want to get political we don't want to
speak again and that's when you realize that the
parable of the talents in the scripture talk talks
about that that that somebody who cynically says
I'm gonna I'm gonna take this Talent I'm gonna I'm
gonna bury it uh that way I can't lose it and it's
like no you don't understand God requires of us
to be all in if you're not all in you're judged
guilty and there are a lot of people that right
now are just wanting to not get involved I don't
want to be divisive I don't want to bring this
stuff up and you realize well God is is is asking
you just to try to get it right you might not get
it right but you have to try and to not try and
to just to cover your rear end uh is ends up being
Wicked because people are going to suffer because
of your silence people are going to suffer because
of your inaction your passivity and trying to
paint it uh along some religious lines makes you
even more guilty because you're trying to give
this religious excuse for something that is at war
with God himself with his purposes I'm going to
bring Eric over to the Daily wire side because we
haven't we're not on the dark side enough yet so
we might as well go there and uh we're going to
talk a little bit about how his ideas developed
how they made themselves manifest across time
we did that a little bit with his description
of his quite remarkable dream and so a few people
who are watching and listening are inclined you
might want to head over there it's not such
a bad idea to throw a shackle so to speak the
daily wire way at the moment because YouTube has
decided to go to war with us and Them let's say
um of course we didn't say anything inflammatory
today so just to maintain the peace can I say
something inflammatory one final inflammatory
thing hey man I just I wanna no but just because
we we touched on so many things and yet there's so
many things we didn't touch Sean I would like to
shamelessly ask people simply to visit my website
which is ericmataxis.com because there's so many
things that I wanted to say in the course of this
and obviously wasn't able to but it's just my name
if you can spell it it's Greek Eric mataxis.com
but I just um talking to you Dr Peterson you know
it's such a joy because there's so many directions
that we can go in and so many directions that we
did we didn't get to go in but these things are
important these are all profoundly important
beautiful things and let me just say thank you
to you from the bottom of my heart for being
uh a courageous voice in the midst of uh the din
around us well thank you very much for agreeing
to talk to me today and for everybody watching and
listening your attention and time is not taken for
granted we appreciate the fact that you're coming
along for the ride so to speak I'm going to switch
over now to uh the daily wire side and continue
this conversation and uh well very nice to meet
you Eric I'm sure we'll meet again uh no doubt
we'll talk again God willing and uh thank you
again for everybody who's watching listening
to the Daily Word plus crew for putting this
together facilitating these conversations to the
film crew here in Toronto that's much appreciated
as well and uh sayonara sir we'll talk to you on
the daily wire side thank you [Music] thank you